<h1> Paddy Leaf Diseases Recognition Using Convolution Neural Network </h1>
<h2> Introduction </h2>
<p> Rice is one of the staple sustenance of the world. Be that as it may, the creation of rice is hampered by different sort of paddy leaf diseases. One of the primary diseases of paddy is leaf disease. By and large, it is very tedious and arduous for ranchers of remote regions to recognize paddy leaf diseases because of inaccessibility of specialists. Though experts are available in some areas, disease detections are performed by the naked eye which causes inappropriate recognition sometimes. An automated system can minimize these problems. In this paper, an automated system is proposed for the diagnosis of two common diseases (Brown spot and Bacterial blight). This type of paddy leaf diseases recognized by Convolution Neural Network (CNN). A convolution neural network is a type of artificial neural network used in image recognition and processing that is specifically designed to process pixel data. Deep learning with convolution neural networks (CNNs) has made extraordinary progress in the characterization of different plant disease. In this paper, we are focused on the most common disease of paddy leaf disease and recognitions them with the help of convolution neural network</P>
<h2> Dataset Collection </h2>
<p>The paddy leaf disease images have been taken from the UCI Machine Learning Repository and local paddy field. </P>
<h2>Image pre-processing </h2>
<p>The acquired dataset consisted of images with minimal noise and hence noise removal was not a necessary preprocessing step. 
The images in the dataset were resized to 150×150 resolution in order to speed up the training process and make the model training computationally feasible. 
The process of standardizing either the input or target variables tends to speed up the training process.
This is done through improvement of the numerical condition of the optimization problem. 
It is also made sure that the several default values involved in initialization and termination are appropriate. 
For our purpose, we normalize the images to get all the pixel values in the same range by using the mean and the standard deviation. 
In machine learning terms, it is called as the Z-score. </p>
<h2> Building CNN Model </h2>
<p>Convolutional neural networks (CNN) can be utilized for the production of a computational model that deals with the unstructured picture data sources and changes over them to relating classiﬁcation yield names. They have a place with the classification of multi-layer neural networks which can be prepared to become familiar with the required highlights for classiﬁcation purposes. 
They require less pre-preparing in contrast with customary methodologies and perform programmed highlight extraction which gives better execution. With the end goal of paddy leaf infection identification, we have explored different avenues regarding a few standard profound learning models like AlexNet and as well as could be expected be seen with the utilization of a variety of the LeNet engineering.
    LeNet is a basic CNN model that comprises of convolutional, enactment, pooling and completely associated layers. The design utilized for the classiﬁcation of the paddy leaf diseases is a variety of the LeNet model. It comprises of an extra square of convolutional, actuation and pooling layers in contrast with the first LeNet engineering.
    Each block consists of a convolutional, activation and a max pooling layer. Three such blocks followed by fully connected layers and softmax activation are used in this architecture. Convolutional and pooling layers are used for feature extraction whereas the fully connected layers are used for classiﬁcation. Activation layers are used for introducing non-linearity into the network.
    Convolutional layer applies convolution operation for extraction of features. With the rise thorough, the complexness of the extracted options will increase. the dimensions of the ﬁlter is ﬁxed to 3×3 whereas variety of ﬁlters is accrued more and more as we have a tendency to move from one block to a different. The quantity of ﬁlters is thirty two within the ﬁrst convolutional block whereas it's accrued to sixty four within the second and 128 within the third. This increase within the variety of ﬁlters is important to atone for the reduction within the size of the feature maps caused by the utilization of pooling layers in every of the blocks. The feature maps also are zero padded so as to preserve the dimensions of the image once the appliance of the convolution operation. The scoop pooling layer is used for reduction in size of the feature maps, rushing up the training method, and creating the model less variant to minor changes in input. The kernel size for max pooling is 2×2. ReLU activation layer is employed in every of the blocks for the introduction of non-linearity. Also, Dropout regularization technique has been used with a keep chance of 0.5 to avoid overﬁtting the plaything. Dropout regularization haphazardly way} drops neurons within the network throughout every iteration of training so as to cut back the variance of the model and change the network which aids in interference of overﬁtting. Finally, the classiﬁcation block consists of 2 sets totally connected neural network layers. The second dense layer is followed by a softmax activation perform to calculate the chance scores for the 2 categories.
 </p>
 <h2>Dataset Descriptions </h2>
 <p> The paddy leaf disease images have been taken from the UCI Machine Learning Repository and local paddy field. Images for the diseases were downloaded using a python script. The acquired dataset consists of around 272 images belonging to 2 different classes. The dataset includes images of all major kinds of leaf diseases. Each of the downloaded and captured images belongs to the RGB color space by default and were stored in the uncompressed JPG format</P>
 <h2> Experimental Settings </h2>
 <p> The implementation of the proposed methodology has been carried out on the LUC Machine Learning and locally collected dataset. It consists of around 272 images belonging to 2 different classes of paddy leaf diseases. Keras, a neural network API written in Python, has been used for the model implementation. Out of the 272 images, 60 images were set aside for testing and 212 images were used for training. In order to increase the dataset, automatic data augmentation techniques have been used by randomly rotating the images by a small amount of 20 degrees, horizontal ﬂipping, vertical and horizontal shifting of images. The optimization was carried out using Adam optimizer with categorical cross entropy as the loss function. Batch size of 4 has been used and the model has been trained for 300 epochs. The initial learning rate has been set to 0.01 and it is reduced by a factor of 0.3 on plateau where the loss stops decreasing. Early stopping has also been used in order to monitor the validation loss and stop the training process once it increases. All the experiments were performed on Intel Core i3-2350M CPU
 </p>
 <h2>	Result and Analysis</h2>
 <p>  A highest validation accuracy of 100% was obtained over 300 epochs of training, while a high 94.4% of training accuracy was reported. An average validation accuracy of 92.3% has been obtained. This is an effective measure of the classiﬁcation made by the deep learning model. It can be seen that the model has stabilized after 100 epochs and the metrics do not show a signiﬁcant improvement the model accuracy between 89% to 94%. After 150epochs accuracy slightly down and up at a certain range. The results show that the model performs well on the dataset and can be used as a means for classiﬁcation of the 2 paddy leaf diseases with minimum resource requirements.
 </p>
 <h2> Conclusion </h2>
 <p>     Agricultural sector remains one among the foremost vital sectors over that the majority of the Bangladesh population depends on. Detection of diseases in these crops is thus essential to the expansion of the economy. Paddy is one among the staple crops that is made in massive quantities. Hence, this paper aims at detection and identiﬁcation of 2 completely different diseases within the paddy crop. The projected methodology uses a convolutional neural network model to classify paddy leaf diseases. The design used could be a straightforward convolutional neural network with minimum variety of layers to classify paddy leaf diseases into 2 completely different categories. Completely different learning rates and optimizers may even be used for experimenting with the projected model as a section of the longer term work. It may conjointly embody experimentation with newer architectures, massive dataset and a lot of categories for rising the performance of the model on the toy and support farmer. Thus, the preceding model may be created use of as a call tool to assist and support farmers in distinctive the diseases that may be found within the paddy leaf. With associate accuracy of 91-92% the methodology projected will create associate correct detection of the paddy leaf diseases with very little procedure effort.
 <p/>
